This is one of the highest honors Ive ever received. When I looked to see who some other forum speakers have been, I quickly felt out of place. In fact, I felt like the speaker I heard a few years ago at the National Prayer Breakfast in Washington, DC.
Some 4,000 guests attend this breakfast each February, including the president, the vice president, members of the cabinet, House and Senate members, visiting heads of state, and world leaders. Past speakers include Billy Graham, Mother Teresa, Alexander Solzhenitsyn, and Tony Blair.
Well, like me, this particular speaker was not especially well known and felt a bit intimidated by his task. He told of sending an email to his pastor the night before, seeking some moral and spiritual support. His pastor wrote back, "Just remember, if youre representing the Lord, you have nothing to worry about - its the Lord who should be worried!"
Well, Im not worried this morning, but I am aware that Im not smart enough to be addressing a prominent university audience. Being in an academic setting reminds me of a story I heard about a class that had been studying birds for much of the semester.
They had studied everything you could possibly study about birds - their feathers, their eyes, their color, and their mating and migration habits. Well, the day for the final test arrived. The teacher distributed a single sheet of paper with 10 pictures showing just the feet of 10 birds and a blank line under each one. He gave the instructions: "Identify each bird by its feet, and youre free to go."
Just then a guy at the back of the room pounded his fist on his desk and shouted, "This is the stupidest thing Ive ever seen!" He wadded his paper into a ball, threw it toward the trash can, and headed for the door.
Just as he reached the door, the teacher yelled, "Young man, whats your name?"
The student ripped off his shoes and socks, pulled up his pant legs, and said, "Here, Teacher! If youre so smart, why dont you tell me?"
Ive always wanted to visit Brigham Young University. Most of you were still in high school when Jerry Falwell went to heaven five years ago. Jerry founded Liberty University in Lynchburg, Virginia, 40 years ago, and in 1980 I went to Liberty, where I played football for four years as a placekicker.
Since the earliest days of Liberty University, Jerry famously and repeatedly declared, "I want Liberty University to be for the evangelical young person what Notre Dame is for the Catholic and Brigham Young is for the Mormon - a world-class university." Well, God gave him enough years to see that dream largely realized.
Today Liberty has 78,000 students, including 13,000 on campus, making it the seventh-largest school of any kind in the country. As an alumnus and a trustee of Liberty, Ive looked forward to the day I would see BYU for myself. So thank you for honoring me with the invitation to speak from this pulpit.
Dr. Falwell also challenged his students and staff constantly: "If its Christian, it ought to be better." I love high standards of excellence, and this university certainly models them. Sadly, much of what is done under the banner of "Christian" is done poorly. Nineteenth-century British novelist and poet Dorothy Sayers wrote a fabulous piece titled "Why Work?" She concluded, "The only Christian work is good work well done."
We are in the middle of an intense political season in this country, and Ive been privileged to be an advisor to a presidential campaign - something Ive done voluntarily both in this cycle and the last one. Im not here today to talk about politics, but I do want to share how my involvement with a prominent member of your church led me to try to make a difference on an issue thats not political.
Incidentally, the last time I was in this state was in September, when I spent a day traveling with Mitt Romney and his personal aide, a young University of Mississippi graduate named Garrett. Mitt told me about a previous trip in Utah during which a man came up to Garrett after an event and, making an assumption, asked, "So, where did you do your mission?"
Not missing a beat, Garrett replied, "Im a Southern Baptist - Im on my mission."
As an evangelical Christian, I was well aware of doctrinal differences between your faith and mine. But once I decided to help Mitt Romney, I began to see an all-too-ugly side of a theological divide. Sadly, far too much of the ugliness - though certainly not all of it - came from within my own camp.
In 2007 I was interviewed by a talented Mormon film producer for a documentary titled Article VI: Faith, Politics, America. The film opens with a moving scene from your semiannual general conference, narrated by the producer. He shares how attending this important church gathering with his family was a highlight of the year for as long as he could remember - except, that is, for what he had to walk past in order to join his extended church family inside the LDS Conference Center.
Bryan Hall, like many of you, had to navigate a gauntlet of non-Mormon - really anti-Mormon - protesters, preachers, and loud mouths, most of them behaving as sorry ambassadors of the very Jesus Christ they purported to represent. Though I had nothing to do with this scene, which apparently is repeated every April and October, it convicted and saddened me enough to try to do something about it.
But first, let me tell you that Bryan Hall and I became wonderful friends through this film. We have shared much of our respective journeys with Christ and have learned from each other in the process. Bryan, you and Melanie honored April and me by having us in your home on Sunday and by coming here this morning. Thank you.
By the way, I also want to thank Professor Robert Millet and Pastor Greg Johnson - founders of Standing Together - for coming, and for your important work.
This treatment of Mormons - Latter-day Saints like Mitt Romney and Bryan Hall - by many who claim to be followers of Christ, along with the sometimes violent treatment from those who oppose your church for your strong defense of traditional marriage, prompted me, as an evangelical Christian, to try to inspire a national dialogue about civility.
Also, though I disagreed with then Senator Obama on many things, I found myself, even as a political conservative, being troubled by the way many people were treating him - ways I also didnt think were Christlike.
So I decided to launch a civility project. I bought the appropriate domain addresses and began to develop a plan and a website. I wrote a simple three-point pledge, which I thought anyone in this country could agree to, regardless of political or religious affiliation. It read as follows:
1. I will be civil in my public discourse and behavior.
2. I will be respectful of others, whether or not I agree with them.
3. 